In Javascript, there are also some important built-in objects you may use
and in this lecture, I'll
have a look at the math object.
So the math object gives us access to some built-in properties or functions
connected to the topic of mathematics.
So if I create a new variable here for example and I call it pi and as you might be aware, this is something
like 3.14
and so on
but probably you don't do it by heart and maybe you need more decimal places than just the first two.
So a great way to get access to pi is to use the math object
and then the pi property
and now if I log pi to the console, what you think we'll get?
We get Pi with a lot more decimal places than just the first two.
The same is there for E,
so if we log this, we got E.
So we get these very important mathematical symbols built-in and available with the built-in math object
which you may use like this.
We not only got some built-in properties or important math symbols, we also got some useful functions
or methods which we can use, for example imagine we have a which is -3
and we wanted to get the absolute value of it,
we could use the abs method and just pass a.
Now what do you think will happen if I hit run?
Of course we get 3, so the absolute value ignoring the minus sign here, just the distance to zero
.
We also could have a value, a floating point number and we could call round, if I now hit run,
of course we get one.
We also have Math.ceil,
what do you think this function does?
What do you think will happen if I hit run?
I get two, this function
always rounds the number but it always rounds it up to the next full integer,
so 2 in this case.
On the other hand, we also have floor which would if we have 1.99
still give us 1,
so this function always rounds the number down to the closest integer.
We also can use some exponential calculations by using the exp method and passing 2, I'm not asking
what we'll get but we get this,
so this is e to the power of a, which is two in this case, e to the power of two
within
therefore. We also might use the logarithm, by default
the natural logarithm here
and if I again use e here and note of course that this has to be a capital E
and now I hit run, now I'm asking what will we see in the console because this is solvable in the head?
Well we get one because the natural logarithm of E is one, you learned that in math, didn't you?
So these are some built-in useful functions,
now there are some more useful functions,
for example the max function where I just pass a list of arguments and this list may be as long as I
need it
and now what you think we'll get if I hit run? I think it shouldn't be too difficult, I get 1000,
so the highest possible value
and of course I have min which unsurprisingly will give me one here.
We also have, and this an important of one, Math.random,
now what do you think we'll get here?
Well hard to guess but we get a random number and the random number will be, and that's important to understand,
between 0 and 1
and as you can see, it also uses or is a floating point number and random numbers are of course something
you'll often need in applications because a lot of applications use some kind of random effects. You might
have a lottery application or a quiz or whatever,
oftentimes you'll need a random number but oftentimes, you also need a random number which is not between
0 and 1
and using floating point numbers
but for example between 1 and 10 or 1 and 100.
How could you generate such a number?
Well Math.random only gives you this kind of number but it's easy to transform it. I'll create a new variable
called random and I'll generate a random number here
but then I'll multiply that with 100
if I want to have a number between 1 and 100 because now if I log this,
you'll see that we get higher numbers,
so numbers between 0 and 100
or specifically, 0 and 99.9999,
so 100 would be excluded.
However I want them to be including 100
and I also want to have them from 1 to 100, not 0 to 99.9999, in order to do this, I'll add plus 1.
This makes sure that I started one, not at zero because I'm adding one to the possible smallest number
which is zero
and I also go up to 100.9999 as the highest number.
Now I also don't want that,
so we're almost there but I don't want to have 100.999 as the highest number and I also don't want
floating numbers,
so now I can use Math.floor on the expression where I multiply it with 100 to make sure that I only
get integers and that the highest possible number is 100
because 100.99999 would get rounded down to 100
and of course 0.99999 would also get rounded down to zero
but since I add plus 1, I start at 1 and here of course just to make sure that you understand it, 100
is excluded by default or the highest number is excluded,
therefore the highest possible number here would 99.99999, I round it down to 99, add 1, so
100 is the highest possible.
So now if I hit clear and then run it,
we got 100 right away but we also get a lot of other numbers as you see.
So this is how you can play around with that
and here you see that we're using two different math functions as well with some logical thinking to generate
the range of numbers we want to have for our random number
and as already mentioned, random numbers are probably something you often use in your application.